\[PHOTO\]

\[PHOTO CAPTION\] *Spring, a watercolour by British artist Joseph Rubens Powell, active between 1835 and 1871. Reproduced by the kind permission of the National Gallery, London, under its Open Access programme 2025.*

\[INTRO\] Easter Sunday celebrates the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, a pivotal event that forms the cornerstone of the Christian faith. It signifies Jesus\'s victory over sin and death, offering humanity the promise of eternal life and redemption. Easter is a time for Catholics to rejoice in this victory, reflect on its significance, and embrace the new life offered through Christ\'s resurrection. Here\'s a deeper look into the meaning of Easter.

**\[TITLE\] Spiritual Thought For Easter Sunday**

As we celebrate Easter, it is important that we understand that the resurrection of Jesus is not just a historical episode, it is the central tenet of Catholic belief. St Paul explains in his letter to the Christian community in Corinth that \"If Christ has not been raised, your faith is futile\" (1 Corinthians 15:17). St Paul's admonition recognises that the Resurrection is not only Christ's triumph over death, but also it is God's gift to humanity. To paraphrase Romans 6:4, St Paul writes "Just as Christ was raised ... we too might walk in newness of life."

What does St Paul mean by this? While the crucifixion is the means of the redemption of our sins, the Resurrection is the source of our spiritual rebirth. This grace is not metaphorical---it's the promise of real participation in divine life. It signifies Jesus\'s victory over sin and death, offering humanity the promise of eternal life and redemption. Easter then is a time for Catholics to rejoice in this victory, reflect on its significance, and embrace the new life offered through Christ\'s resurrection The Resurrection transforms suffering and death---not by removing them, but by giving them meaning and the certainty of God's fidelity. As the First Epistle of St Peter (1:3) says, "He has given us a new birth into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ...."

It is a theme that has special relevance for St Saviour's Church this year. The recently deceased Holy Father, Pope Francis, decided that 2025 is a year of Jubilee, something which happens every 25 years. The theme is "Pilgrims of Hope," and it is a year of hope for a world suffering the impacts of war, the ongoing effects of COVID-19 pandemic, and a climate crisis. As St Saviour's has been designated as a Sanctuary Church this year, this theme of hope provides our parishioners with special resonance. We celebrate the resurrection as an affirmation of our belief in the victory of light over darkness, life over death. Easter Sunday is a time of renewal and rebirth, symbolising the beginning of a new chapter in the life of the Church and the world.

As a special grace, the Resurrection also brings us deeper into the community of the Risen Christ. After the Resurrection, Jesus appeared to his disciples (up to 500 of them) and to his closest friends, the Apostles, Mary of Magdala and, equally significantly, two of his followers on the road to Emmaus (Luke 24:13-35). Initially, they do not seem to recognise him. Jesus walks with them, and they discuss the events surrounding his crucifixion, including the women\'s report of the empty tomb. Jesus asked them what they were discussing, and they shared their disappointment, expressing their hopes that Jesus was the one who would redeem Israel. He then gently chides them for their lack of faith in the prophets and kindly explains how the Messiah was prophesied to suffer before entering his glory. Finally, the disciples recognise Jesus when he breaks bread with them, and he then vanishes. And in the immediate aftermath of this encounter, we come to understand how deeply his teaching and his appearance has touched their hearts. Their first thought is to share the good news with their community.

Similarly, the meeting Jesus has with his Apostles on the shore of the Sea of Tiberias (also known as the Sea of Galilee) after his resurrection carries equal significance. Some of the Apostles, including Peter, were fishing and had caught nothing all night. Jesus, standing on the shore, instructed them to cast their net on the right side of the boat, which almost capsized after a miraculously large catch of fish. The disciple whom Jesus loved recognises him, and Peter, hearing it was the Lord, swims to shore. Both these apparitions emphasise Jesus\'s restoration of the faith of his disciples and his continued provision for them, even when unrecognised.

The Resurrection then is not the end of the story. In fact, it is the foundation of the Church's mission. Before Jesus ascends to his rightful home, he promises the care, inspiration, and love of the Holy Spirit, which gives the Apostles the fire and drive to go out to spread the Good News, not as witnesses of a doctrine, but as a living encounter with the divine. It gives them the strength, to quote the Gospel of Matthew (28:19) to "Go therefore and make disciples ...".

Our celebration of Easter invites us to receive these graces anew and to carry the gifts that God has deigned to give us, in worship and thanks at every Mass, in every prayer we recite and in every act of love, every moment of trust we give, every day. And we do this in the knowledge that the Christ always walks beside us, unseen, but never absent.
