\[photo\]

\[photo caption\]

\[intro\] The Sacred Heart Novena is most traditionally prayed during
the nine days leading up to the Solemnity of the Sacred Heart of Jesus,
which is always 19 days after Pentecost on a Friday. While this novena
leads up to the Solemnity of the Sacred Heart of Jesus, it also prepares
our hearts for the Memorial of the Immaculate Heart of Mary the day
after.

\[title\] **Novena to the Sacred Heart of Jesus**

\[MAIN TEXT\]

**SHORT FORM NOVENA:** O most holy heart of Jesus, fountain of every
blessing, I adore you, I love you, and with lively sorrow for my sins, I
offer you this poor heart of mine. Make me humble, patient, pure and
wholly obedient to your will. Grant, good Jesus, that I may live in you
and for you. O my Jesus, you have said: "Truly I say to you, ask and you
will receive, seek and you will find, knock and it will be opened to
you." Protect me in the midst of danger. Comfort me in my afflictions.
Give me health of body, assistance in my temporal needs, your blessing
on all that I do, and the grace of a holy death. Amen.

*This is followed by: The Our Father, the Hail Mary, and the Glory be to
the Father.*

Sacred Heart of Jesus, I place all my trust in you. O my Jesus, you have
said: "Truly I say to you, if you ask anything of the Father in my name,
he will give it to you."  Behold, in your name, I ask the Father for the
grace of my request. 

*This is followed by: The Our Father, the Hail Mary, and the Glory be to
the Father.*

Sacred Heart of Jesus, I place all my trust in you.\
O my Jesus, you have said: "Truly I say to you, heaven and earth will
pass away but my words will not pass away."

*This is followed by: The Our Father, the Hail Mary, and the Glory be to
the Father.*

Sacred Heart of Jesus, for whom it is impossible not to have compassion
on the afflicted, have pity on us miserable sinners and grant us the
grace which we ask of you, through the Sorrowful and Immaculate Heart of
Mary, your tender Mother and ours. 

**SALVE REGINA:** Hail, Holy Queen, Mother of Mercy, Hail our life, our
sweetness and our hope. To you do we cry, poor banished children of Eve.
To you do we send up our sighs, mourning and weeping in this valley of
tears. Turn then, most gracious advocate, your eyes of mercy toward us,
and after this, our exile, show unto us the blessed fruit of thy womb,
Jesus.\
O clement, O loving, O sweet Virgin Mary. May we be made worthy of the
promises of Christ.

**ALTERNATIVE NOVENA TO THE SACRED HEART OF JESUS**

***To be said each day for nine consecutive days***

In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.

O my Jesus, you have said: "Truly I say to you, ask and you will
receive, seek and you will find, knock and it will be opened to you."

Behold I knock, I seek and ask for the grace of...(*Mention your
intention here*)

Sacred Heart of Jesus, I place all my trust in you.

O my Jesus, you have said: "Truly I say to you, if you ask anything of
the Father in my name, he will give it to you." Behold, in your name, I
ask the Father for the grace of...(*Mention your intention here*)

Sacred Heart of Jesus, I place all my trust in you.

O my Jesus, you have said: "Truly I say to you, heaven and earth will
pass away but my words will not pass away." Encouraged by your
infallible words I now ask for the grace of...(*Mention your intention
here*)

Sacred Heart of Jesus, I place all my trust in you.

O Sacred Heart of Jesus, for whom it is impossible not to have
compassion on the afflicted, have pity on us miserable sinners and grant
us the grace which we ask of you, through the Sorrowful and Immaculate
Heart of Mary, your tender Mother and ours. Amen.

***Concluding Prayers***

Our Father; Hail Mary; Glory Be to the Father

St. Joseph, foster father of Jesus, pray for us.

In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
