![A group of people in armor with spears and
spears](./learning-hub/chronologies/A TIMELINE OF KEY EVENTS IN 12TH CENTURY CATHOLIC CHURCH HISTORY/media/image1.png){width="6.605555555555555in"
height="3.8243055555555556in"}*\[PHOTO CAPTION\] Master Max AI depiction
of the siege of Jerusalem in 1099, during the First Crusade. Copyright
belongs to St Saviour's Church, Lewisham, 2025.*

\[INTRO\] The end of the 11th century and the start of the 12^th^
century was a watershed for the Catholic Church. Major changes in the
European and Near Eastern political landscape had far-reaching
implications for Catholics of the period. Below is a timeline
highlighting some of the highlights of the period, which affected the
Catholic Church and the principal theologians and popes of the day. They
are and will be covered in more detail in subsequent articles and
discussions.

\[TITLE\] **The Catholic Church In The 12^th^ Century: a timeline of key
events**

\[MAIN TEXT\] Seminal events for the Catholic Church in the 12^th^
century included the start of a series of (eventually) seven Crusades,
which were prosecuted with varying success and ultimately culminated in
the loss of the Holy Land to the Seljuk Turks. Over time too, the
prosecution of the Crusades negatively impacted the relationship between
the Western and Eastern churches, resulting in the Great Schism in 1054.
There were also doctrinal differences that had grown up over the
centuries. These included questions over the legitimacy of Papal
authority and the Filioque clause of the Nicene Creed (the Western
Church believes the Holy Spirit proceeds equally from the Father and the
Son; while the Eastern church believes he is the spirit of God the
Father only). The schism helped shape the political landscape of the
era, particularly in the West in the post-Carolingian era, which saw the
growing power of northern European states, which began to challenge the
authority of Rome. 

Spiritually, key figures such as the Italian monk and statesman
Lanfranc, and the English Benedictine monk Anselm of Canterbury, led
church reforms in England, including the reorganisation of dioceses and
establishing firmer monastic rules. Anselm also wrote influential works,
such as *Why Did God Become a Man*? exploring the reasons for Christ\'s
death. Polyphonic singing emerged, replacing Gregorian Chant, and the
harp arrived in Europe. 

The 12th century saw a series of significant popes who navigated complex
political landscapes and religious reforms. Some notable figures
include Paschal II, Calixtus II, Innocent II, and Alexander III.  Other
notable popes of the 12th century include Honorius II, Celestine II,
Lucius II, Eugene III, Anastasius IV, and Lucius III, each contributing
to the complex history of the papacy during this period. This era also
witnessed the rise of antipopes and internal conflicts within the
Church. 

The century also witnessed the emergence of new and innovative centres
of learning, such as the University of Paris and the University of
Bologna. These were modelled on the schools of thought, learning and
religion in the Middle East, particularly in historical cities, such as
Alexandria (Egypt) and Baghdad (now the capital of modern Iraq).
Following the works of scholars such as Peter Abelard and Peter Lombard,
who brought the ideas of Greek philosophy into their critique and
exposition of theological thought, an academic approach called
scholastic theology emerged, which emphasised logical reasoning and the
systematic presentation of Christian doctrine.

The 12th century was also a period of significant development and reform
within monasticism, marked by the rise of new orders and internal
debates about the balance between spiritual life and worldly
involvement. Key events include the foundation of the Cistercian order,
the spread of the Augustinian rule, and the emergence of the mendicant
orders. The rise of the mendicant orders, such as the Franciscans and
Dominicans, began to shift the focus of monasticism towards active
ministry within the laity, preaching, and serving the poor. 

**1093:** The Benedictine monk Anselm succeeds Lanfranc as Archbishop of
Canterbury. Anselm of Canterbury (1033-1109) is best known for his
ontological argument for God\'s existence. His work bridges the gap
between faith and reason. 

**1095:** Pope Urban II calls for the First Crusade to reclaim the Holy
Land, following the violent entry of Turks into Jerusalem. He is
supported by the influential cleric St Bernard of Clairvaux. However,
the Crusade (which means, The Way of the Cross) did not leave for
another four years in 1099). It was the embryo of the later concept of
Holy War.

**1098:** The Cistercian order, known for its reforms, is founded at
Citeaux. The order signified a return to the original, stricter
interpretation of the Benedictine rule and a focus on manual labour and
simple living. 

**1099:** Pope Paschall II is invested. He campaigned for the abolition
of the lay investiture of bishops, without success in Germany, but with
some success in England and France.

**1101: **Antipope Theodoric and Antipope Adalbert are deposed by Pope
Paschal II.

**1113:** The Knights Hospitaller (Sovereign Order of Saint John of
Jerusalem), a Catholic military order, was founded in Jerusalem and was
quickly confirmed by Papal bull by Pope Paschal II the same year. Its
headquarters remained in Jerusalem until 1291, after which it
transferred to various castles throughout the Greek island archipelago,
finally settling in Malta in 1530. The order rose at the height of the
reformist Cluniac movement within the Benedictine monastic order, which
focused on fostering piety and care for the poor. Within 20 years it had
become a military order, under its own papal charter, charged with the
defence of the Holy Land -- a task it fulfilled in the region until the
Siege of Acre in 1291, which resulted in the reconquest of the Holy Land
by Seljuk Turks.

![A statue of a person in a robe holding a sword and
shield](./learning-hub/chronologies/A TIMELINE OF KEY EVENTS IN 12TH CENTURY CATHOLIC CHURCH HISTORY/media/image2.png){width="2.1354166666666665in"
height="4.395833333333333in"}**1118:** The Knights Templar were founded
to defend the Holy Land around 1119 in Jerusalem, initially consisting
of nine French knights. Granted quarters in a wing of the royal palace
near the Temple of Solomon, their quarters helped frame the order's name
as the Knights Templar (more formally, the Poor Fellow-Soldiers of
Christ and of the Temple of Solomon). They were given the Cistercian
white mantle with a red cross by Pope Honorius II. Later, Pope Eugenius
III sanctioned the use of the order's Eight-Pointed Cross. The Knights
Templar became a significant military force in the Crusader States,
amassing considerable wealth, with which the order established a network
of command and administrative centres across Europe. By the 14th
century, their influence and power had waned as the Crusader presence in
the Holy Land diminished and King Philip IV of France, deeply in debt to
the Templars, orchestrated their downfall. He accused them of heresy and
other crimes, leading to their arrest and torture. Under pressure from
King Philip, the order was officially suppressed by Pope Clement V in
1312. The order's end came when its Grand Master, Jacques de Molay, was
burned at the stake in Paris in 1314. The order's sudden and dramatic
end has fuelled many a conspiracy theory that persist to the present
day.

**1118:** Benedictine monk and chancellor of Pope Paschall II, Giovanni
Caetano, was voted in as pope, taking the name Gelasius II. However, he
only lasted a year. He was opposed by a powerful faction of bishops and
the Salian Holy Roman Emperor, Henry V. Soon after his election, he was
kidnapped by Cencio II Frangipane, on behalf of the Emperor, but was
freed by a popular uprising. He wasn't free for long. Henry drove him
from Rome, pronounced his election void and set up Maurice Bourdin, the
Archbishop of Braga (Spain) as antipope, under the moniker Gregory VIII.
In exile, Gelasius took holy orders and excommunicated Henry and the
antipope. Later the same year he left for France, ending up at the Abbey
of Cluny, where he hoped to call for a synod to resolve the contest for
the investiture as pope. As the new year turned, he fell ill and died
before a council could be convened.

**1119**: Gelasius II was succeeded by Callistus II, who managed to gain
control of the papal investiture process from the German Holy Roman
Emperor Henry V at the Concordat of Worms. The Concordat, signed in
1122, was an agreement between the Holy Roman Emperor and the Pope that
ended the long-standing dispute over who had the authority to appoint
bishops and other church officials. The agreement established a
distinction between spiritual and secular authority in the appointment
process. 

**1120:** Peter Abelard's *Sic et non* manuscript began to be copied and
distributed. The work explored theological contradictions. Abelard\'s
work is one of the first examples of the scholastic method, which
involved examining arguments for and against a proposition to arrive at
a better understanding of truth. *Sic et Non* was influential in shaping
the development of scholastic theology and logic, despite not being
formally published.  

**1123:** The First Lateran Council was held. The Lateran councils were
ecclesiastical councils or synods held in Rome in the Lateran Palace,
adjoining the Lateran Basilica, founded by the Emperor Constantine in
the fourth century. It is also the seat of the Bishop of Rome (the
Pope). It became a favoured place for ecclesiastic councils, especially
in the Medieval period.

**1124:** Honorius II becomes pope. Honorius II\'s election was
tumultuous. Initially, Cardinal Teobaldo Boccapeccora was elected, but a
faction led by Roberto Frangipani opposed this and favoured Lamberto
Scannabecchi, who eventually became Pope Honorius II. By 1124, there
were two great factions dominating local politics in Rome:
the Frangipani family, which controlled the region around the
fortified Colosseum and supported the northern cardinals, and
the Pierleoni family, which controlled the Tiber Island and the fortress
of the Theatre of Marcellus and supported the Italian cardinals.
Although the rule of Honorius was marked by a talent for diplomacy,
controversy haunted his papacy. Even so, he oversaw a period of
spiritual renewal in the church.

**1130: **Peter of Bruys, a critic of the Catholic Church, is burned at
the stake**.**

**1130:** Gregorio Papereschi is voted in as pope, taking the name
Innocent II. Like his predecessor Honorius II, his election was mired in
controversy. Elected by a minority, the favoured candidate was Cardinal
Pietro Pierleoni, who declared himself pope, taking the name Anacletus
II. Innocent was hastily consecrated, but by June 1130 Anacletus forced
him to flee to France. However, interventions by the powerful Archbishop
St. Norbert of Magdeburg, Saxony, and the highly regarded Abbot St.
Bernard of Clairvaux, swayed both the French Church and King Henry I of
England, who took Innocent's side. Norbert also won over the German
Church and garnered support from the German king Lothar II/III. Once
secure in his tenure, Innocent II continued many of the reforms proposed
by Gregory the Great.

**1139:** The Second Lateran Council was held. Although it was the
10^th^ ecumenical council recognised by the Church, it was nonetheless
controversial. It was convened by Pope Innocent II, in the hope of
neutralising the aftereffects of the schism, or split in the church
following the death of Pope Honorius II in 1130. Moreover, the papal
election held that year which resulted in the antipope Anacletus II.

**1142: **Peter Abelard\'s letters with Heloise are written.

**1144: **The Basilica of Saint-Denis, a major building in the new
Gothic style, is completed.

**1148:** Peter Lombard\'s *Sentences*, a four-book compendium of
Christian theology, was first published in the mid-12th century,
specifically between 1148 and 1151. It quickly became a standard
textbook in medieval universities and significantly influenced
theological thought for centuries.** **While teaching at Notre Dame,
Lombard composed *Sentences* in two phases in the 1150s. The work is
systematic, explaining various aspects of Christian theology, drawing on
patristic interpretations of Scripture. *Sentences* became one of the
most important religious texts of the Middle Ages. It was widely used in
theological studies in universities, with students expected to lecture
on it and write commentaries.** **

![A letter with a painting on it AI-generated content may be
incorrect.](./learning-hub/chronologies/A TIMELINE OF KEY EVENTS IN 12TH CENTURY CATHOLIC CHURCH HISTORY/media/image3.jpeg){width="1.96875in"
height="3.1458333333333335in"}**1153:** Saint, Cistercian abbot and
doctor, Bernard of Clairvaux dies. St Bernard of Clairvaux was one of
the most famous, charming and dynamic figures of the Middle Ages. He
played a pivotal role in the development of the Cistercian Order, and
was an active participant in political and ecclesiastical affairs. He
was an avid supporter of the Crusades, for instance. Saint Bernard left
a considerable body of work which include over 300 letters and sermons,
mystical works and devotions to the Virgin. He famously penned The
Memorare. Bernard was opposed to scholasticism, which grew in popularity
following the publication of works by Peter Abelard and Peter Lombard.
St Bernard thought the critical philosophy of scholasticism undermined
God's mysteries. He thought that proper understanding of the divine came
through prayer and charity, not rational argument.

**1155:** The Carmelites were founded by hermits and monks, who built a
shrine to devoted to Our Lady. The Latin patriarch of Jerusalem, St.
Albert, gave the hermits a Rule of Life based on Scripture. Over the
next two hundred years the Carmelites established their headquarters in
the Stella Maris monastery on Mount Carmel in northern Israel. The order
eventually evolved into two main branches: the Carmelites of the Ancient
Observance and the Discalced Carmelites. The Discalced Carmelites were
founded in the 16th century by St. Teresa of Avila and St. John of the
Cross. This order emphasised a more contemplative and secluded life,
exemplified in St Teresa's main work: *The Interior Castle*. The
Carmelites have a strong devotion to Our Lady, and to the prophet
Elijah. 

**1163:** Construction of Notre Dame de Paris begins.

**1173:** The Waldensians, a reformist group, are founded. 

**1179:** The Catholic Third Lateran Council was held. All Church
historians agree, this was a significant synod. Two years earlier, the
treaty called the Peace of Venice was signed that ended the conflict
between Pope Alexander II and the Emperor Frederick I, called
Barbarossa. The row ostensibly centred on the validity of the papacy
itself. After Pope Adrian IV died in 1159, two popes were elected by
competing groups of cardinals. Roland of Siena, who took the name of
Alexander III, was voted in by the majority of cardinals. However,
Octavian of Rome, supported by Frederick, pressured a small group of
cardinals to vote him, pope and took the name Victor IV. To support his
puppet pope Frederick, who also wanted control of the papacy, declared
war upon the Italian states. A serious schism arose out of this
conflict, and after Victor IV\'s death in 1164, two further so-called
antipopes were nominated in opposition to Alexander III: Paschal
III (1164--1168) and Callistus III (1168--1178). Eventually, at the
Peace of Venice, Alexander gained important ground, promising Frederick
that he would summon an ecumenical council, which then confirmed his
supremacy as pope. The same synod is also noted for its condemnation of
Catharism, which resulted in its violent oppression; its legislation
against sodomy; and its enshrinement of the rule that only cardinals can
elect a pope and only then with a two-thirds majority for the vote to be
valid. Any pope arising out of an alternate system would be
automatically excommunicated.

**1191:** The Teutonic Knights the Catholic military order was founded
in Acre, which was then part of the Kingdom of Jerusalem. Formally
called the *Orden der Brüder vom Deutschen Haus der Heiligen Maria in
Jerusalem*  (Order of Brothers of the German House of Saint Mary in
Jerusalem) its job was to protect pilgrims visiting the Holy Land and to
establish hospitals for the sick and the poor. The order started to play
an important role in Outremer (the general name for the Crusader
states), controlling the port tolls of Acre. In 1211, the Order was
invited to the Burzenland (southeastern Transylvania) to help defend the
southeastern borders of the Kingdom of Hungary against the Cumans. As
the Order gradually pushed back the invaders, King Andrew II of
Hungary became concerned he was losing influence. So, in 1225, after
Pope Honorius III\'s papal bull claiming his authority over the Order\'s
territory in Transylvania and its tax exemption toward the king, Andrew
expelled the Order from his country. The order was repeatedly used by
the Church and the Holy Roman Emperors to repel invaders and subdue
rebellions, mainly in northern and eastern Europe. Rather like the
Templars, the Teutonic Knights amassed large fortunes, through its
control of port cities and trade with the Hanseatic League. Unlike the
Templars and Hospitallers, history was much kinder to the Teutonic
Knights, which remained powerful up to the end of the 19^th^ century as
a semi-religious military force. However, the Reformation, the rise of
Protestantism and later the empire-builder Napolean hamstrung much of
their power and influence. However, the Order continued to exist as a
charitable and ceremonial body. It was outlawed by Nazi Germany in
1938, but re-established in 1945. Today it operates primarily with
charitable aims in Central Europe.
