\[PHOTO\]

\[PHOTO CAPTION\]*Engraving of the Crucifixion encased in the Sacred
Heart of Jesus by the German artist Lucas Cranach the Elder
(1472--1553), dated 1505. Reproduced with the kind permission of the
Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, under its Open Access programme
2025.*

\[INTRODUCTION\] The late Pope Benedict XVI, fortified the devotion to
the Sacred Heart in his book Behold the Pierced One, claiming that in
the devotion to the Sacred Heart, the "centre of Christianity is laid
before us".

**\[TITLE\] Devotions to the Sacred Heart**

\[MAINT TEXT\] The image of the Sacred Heart, of the Incarnate Jesus
pointing to his pierced, bleeding, thorn-encircled, and enflamed heart,
presents the heart and face of Christ. To reflect upon these together,
Pope Benedict wrote, is transformative, since "anyone who gazes upon the
face of the Lord, which the servants of the Sanhedrin and Pilate's
servants have spat upon, which they have slapped and covered with
spittle, will see in his face the mirror of our violence, a reflection
of what sin is, and their conscience will be purified in the way that is
the precondition . . . for every improvement in human affairs."

Meditating on Jesus's often scorned and wounded heart, shows us the
ugliness of sin. In adoring it, we move towards purifying our own heart
and conscience, freeing us to develop a closer relationship with the
Divinity of Christ, our Saviour. The image of the Sacred Heart is an
open invitation to participate in Christ's deep and abiding love, which
led to his sacrifice on Calvary, that we might be redeemed. What greater
love is there?

**Devotion to the Sacred Heart and Jesus's promise to celebrants**

The Friday that follows the Second Sunday after Pentecost is the Feast
of the Sacred Heart. Many Catholics prepare for this Feast by beginning
a Novena to the Sacred Heart on the Feast of Corpus Christi, which is
celebrated from the Thursday of the week before. On the Feast of the
Sacred Heart itself, we can gain a plenary indulgence by making an Act
of Reparation to the Sacred Heart.

Devotions to the Sacred Heart were common in Benedictine and Cistercian
monasteries. However, the popularisation of this devotion took root
after St. Margaret Mary Alacoque (1647-1690), a Visitation nun, enjoyed
a personal revelation of the Christ, involving a series of visions as
she prayed before the Blessed Sacrament. She wrote, "He disclosed to me
the marvels of his Love and the inexplicable secrets of his Sacred
Heart." Christ talked to her of His love for mankind and the pain caused
by the indifference of people to this love. He promised that, in
response to those who consecrate themselves and make reparations to His
Sacred Heart. He promised to:

-   give them all the graces necessary in their state of life.

-   establish peace in their homes.

-   comfort them in all their afflictions.

-   be their secure refuge during life, and above all, in death.

-   bestow abundant blessings upon all their undertakings.

-   show sinners that his Heart is the source of an infinite ocean of
    mercy.

-   bless every place in which an image of His Heart is exposed and
    honoured.

-   give to priests the gift of touching the most hardened hearts.

Those who promote this devotion will have their names written in His
Heart. Lukewarm souls will become fervent and fervent souls will quickly
mount to high perfection. Moreover, Jesus promised that the grace of
final perseverance will be given to all those who receive Holy Communion
on the First Fridays for nine consecutive months. Celebrants will not
die in His disgrace, or without receiving the sacraments. His divine
Heart will be their refuge at this time. Devotions attached to these
promises include:

-   Receiving Communion frequently

-   Going to Confession

-   Receiving the Eucharist on the first Friday of each month for nine
    consecutive months.

-   Undertaking Eucharistic Adoration for one hour on Thursdays. This
    Holy Hour can be made alone or as part of a group with formal
    prayers.

-   Celebrating the Feast of the Sacred Heart

**The Prayer of Reparation to the Sacred Heart**

Most sweet Jesus, whose overflowing charity for men is requited by so
much forgetfulness, negligence and contempt, behold us prostrate before
You, eager to repair by a special act of homage the cruel indifference
and injuries to which Your loving Heart is subject.

Mindful that we ourselves have had a share in such indignities, which we
now deplore, we humbly ask Your pardon and declare our readiness to
atone. We do this not only for our own personal offences, but also for
the offences of others who, straying from the path of salvation,
obstinately refuse to follow You, their Shepherd; or who have renounced
the promises of their baptism and cast off the sweet yoke of Your law.

We resolve to expiate the outrages committed against You, determined to
make amends for the manifold offences that offend Your Sacred Heart,
including immodesty, corruption, the violations of Sundays and holy
days, and the sins of blasphemy. We also strive to make amends for the
insults to which the Pope and the clergy are subjected to; for acts of
sacrilege against the Church, its teaching and in particular, against
the Blessed Sacrament. We also ask for forgiveness and make amends by
prayers, for the crimes of nations who resist the rights and teaching
authority of the Church.

We now join in prayerful reparations for any and all violations against
Your Divinity and the immense sacrifice you undertook on Calvary, which
we honour in the Mass. We offer these reparations in union with the acts
of atonement of Your Blessed Mother, those of the Saints and the pious
faithful. We promise to continue with these reparations, with the help
of Your grace, for all the sins we and others have committed in the
past. We promise to live a life of unswerving faith, of purity of
conduct, of perfect observance of the precepts of the Gospel and
especially of charity. We promise to do this to the best of our power
and to try to deter others from offending You, and to try to bring as
many as possible to follow You and the precepts of Your Church.

O loving Jesus, through the intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mother,
our model in reparation, deign to receive the voluntary offering we make
of these reparations. We ask for the crowning gift of perseverance, to
keep us faithful in our duty and the allegiance we owe You, so that we
may all one day come to rest in that happy home, where with the Father
and the Holy Spirit You also live and reign, Amen.

**Enthronement of the Sacred Heart in our homes**

This recognition is manifest by giving the image of the Sacred Heart of
Jesus a place of honor in the home which is solemnly offered to Him by
an act of consecration. A blessed image of the Sacred Heart is hung in a
prominent place in the home, and Sacred Scripture is placed before it.
Formal prayers follow, including:

*O Lord Jesus Christ, To your most Sacred Heart, I confide this
intention: (mention your intention). Only look upon me, And then do What
your Sacred Heart inspires. Let your Sacred Heart decide. I count on it.
I trust in it I throw myself on Your mercy, Lord Jesus! You will not
fail me. Amen.*

**V.** The Word was made Flesh and dwelt amongst us.\
**R.** Eternal Word, made man for love of us, we adore You with mind and
heart, and with the most profound veneration. To make amends for\
our ingratitude for so great a benefit, we unite in sincerity of heart
with all those who love You, and offer You, our most humble and
affectionate thanksgivings. Deeply conscious of that excess of humility,
goodness, and sweetness, which we acknowledge in the Divine Heart,\
we petition You for Thy grace to imitate these virtues, so pleasing to
You.\
\
*This is followed by: The Our Father, the Hail Mary, and the Glory be to
the Father.\
*\
**V.** He was crucified also for us. He suffered under Pontius Pilate
and was buried.\
**R.** Jesus, our admirable Redeemer, we adore You with our mind and
heart, and with the most profound veneration. We grieve for our past
insensibility to the outrages and sufferings which Your most loving
Heart has endured for our redemption through Your bitter Passion. We
unite in sincerity of heart with all those who love You, to thank you
wholeheartedly. We admire the infinite patience and generosity of Your\
Divine Heart, and petition You to replenish our hearts with courage to\
embrace our sufferings and fix our great consolation in Your cross.\
\
*This is followed by: The Our Father, the Hail Mary, and the Glory be to
the Father.\
*\
**V.** Thou hast given them bread from heaven, which abounds with all
delights.\
**R.** O Jesus, burning with love for us, we adore You with our mind and
heart, and with the most profound veneration. We unite with sincere
hearts with all those who love you, render you thanks and atonement for
the outrages which Your Divine Heart suffers in the Most Blessed
Sacrament. We revere you and the love you showed Your Eternal Father,
humbly asking you to inflame our hearts with love of God and of our
neighbour.\
\
This is followed by: The Our Father, the Hail Mary, and the Glory be to
the Father.

**Singular devotional prayers to the Sacred Heart**

**ACT OF ADORATION:**

O Most Holy Heart of my dearly beloved Jesus, I desire to renew and to
offer You these acts of adoration, and these prayers at every possible
moment. I offer them for myself, my family, friends and neighbours. I
recommend to You the holy Catholic Church, its parishioners and the
souls undergoing your justice, poor sinners, the sick and afflicted, the
agonised and all the people of the world.

Although we do not deserve your mercy, we humbly ask not to permit Your
suffering for the redemption of humanity to become useless to sinners
and those who may not accept your teaching and sacrifice. I ask too for
the relief of all souls in Purgatory, particularly to those souls who in
life were pious and devoted to your service.

O Divine Heart of Jesus, I adore You with all my heart and soul and
consecrate them to you for all time. I devote my thoughts, words and
actions to your glory. I ask you to give me strength to face all
challenges, to have steadfast faith in your mercy and infinite merits,
and to protect me and my family, and when my time on earth is over, to
be my refuge when I die. Vouchsafe, through Thine infinite goodness, to
receive and hear my petitions and humble devotions.

**PRAYER OF ADORATION:**

O most holy heart of Jesus, fountain of every blessing, I adore you, I
love you, and with lively sorrow for my sins, I offer you this poor
heart of mine. Make me humble, patient, pure and obedient to your will.
Grant, good Jesus, that I live in you and for you.

**DAILY PRAYER TO THE SACRED HEART:**

O most holy heart of Jesus, fountain of every blessing, I adore You, I
love You, and with lively sorrow for my sins I offer You this poor heart
of mine. Make me humble, patient, pure and wholly obedient to Your will.
Grant, good Jesus, that I may live in You and for You. Protect me in the
midst of danger. Comfort me in my afflictions. Give me health of body,
assistance in my temporal needs, Your blessing on all that I do, and the
grace of a holy death. Amen. 

**PRAYER FOR THE CHURCH:**

Most sacred Heart of Jesus, pour down Your blessings abundantly on Your
holy Church, on the Supreme Pontiff, and on all the clergy. Grant
perseverance to the just, convert sinners, enlighten infidels, bless our
parents, friends, and benefactors, assist the dying, free the souls in
purgatory, and extend over all hearts the sweet empire of Your love. 

**PRAYER TO THE SACRED HEART IN DIFFICULT TIMES:**

Sacred Heart of Jesus, I place all my trust in you. In this time of
difficulty and uncertainty, I turn to you for comfort and strength. Your
love is a beacon of hope, and I know that even in my darkest moments,
you are with me. 

Grant me the grace to trust in your divine will, even when I do not
understand. Help me to see the beauty and purpose in my struggles. Give
me the courage to face my fears and the wisdom to make the right
decisions. 

Sacred Heart of Jesus, you are my refuge and my protector. Be with me in
my trials, and lead me to peace and healing. I ask for your merciful
intercession, and I place my entire being in your loving embrace. 

**ST GERTRUDE'S PRAYER TO THE SACRED HEART:**

O Sacred Heart of Jesus, fountain of eternal life, Your Heart is a
glowing furnace of Love. You are my refuge and my sanctuary.

O my adorable and loving Saviour, consume my heart with the burning fire
with which Yours is inflamed. Pour down on my soul those graces which
flow from Your love. Let my heart be united with Yours. Let my will be
conformed to Yours in all things. May Your Will be the rule of all my
desires and actions. Amen.

**ST MARGARET MARY ALACOQUE'S PRAYER TO THE SACRED HEART:**

Lord Jesus, let my heart never rest until it finds You, who are its
centre, its love, and its happiness. By the wound in Your heart, pardon
the sins that I have committed whether out of malice or out of evil
desires. Place my weak heart in your own divine heart, continually under
your protection and guidance, so that I may persevere in doing good and
in fleeing evil until my last breath. Amen.

**BLESSED MIGUEL PRO'S PRAYER TO THE SACRED HEART:**

Heart of Jesus, I give my heart to Thee. Enclose it in Thee that it may
never be separated from Thee. Heart of Jesus, I am all Thine; but take
care of my promise so that I may be able to put it in practice even unto
the complete sacrifice of my life. Amen.

**MEMORARE TO THE SACRED HEART OF JESUS:**

Remember, O most kind Jesus, that none who have had recourse to Your
Sacred Heart, implored its assistance, or called for mercy, have ever
been abandoned. Filled and animated by this same confidence, O divine
Heart, Ruler of all hearts, I fly to You, and oppressed beneath the
weight of my sins, I prostrate myself before You. Despise not Your
unworthy child, but grant me, I pray, an entrance into Your Sacred
Heart. Sustain me in all my combats and be with me now, and at all
times, but especially in the hour of my death. O gracious Jesus! O
amiable Jesus! O loving Jesus! Amen.

![Heart with solid
fill](./prayer-hub/devotional-prayers/sacred-heart-of-jesus/Devotions to the Sacred Heart of Jesus/media/image1.png){width="0.4270833333333333in"
height="0.3020833333333333in"}
