\[PHOTO\]

\[PHOTO CAPTION\] This painted wooden statue is of Our Lady of Sorrows:
santo de bulto, was likely carved in the late 17^th^ century. It is now
in a special collection in the Cleveland Art Gallery in Ohio, USA. It is
reproduced with the kind permission of the gallery under the Open Access
programme 2025

\[INTRODUCTION\] The devotion to Our Lady of Sorrows is based on the
belief that Mary, through her close relationship with Jesus, shared in
his suffering during his passion and death. This includes the prophecy
of Simeon, the flight into Egypt, the loss of Jesus in the Temple,
carrying the cross, the crucifixion, and the deposition from the cross. 

**\[Title\] Devotions to Our Lady of Sorrows**

**\[MAIN TEXT\]** Meditating on Mary\'s sorrows is believed to lead to a
deeper understanding of Christ\'s love and sacrifice, fostering
spiritual growth and holiness in those who practice the devotion. The
Feast of Our Lady of Sorrows is celebrated on September 15,
commemorating the profound union of heart between Mary and Jesus,
especially during his passion. 

The common theological perspective suggests that devotion to Our Lady of
Sorrows aids discernment to better hear the voice of God, particularly
when we offer up our own suffering to the glory of God and in sincere
regret for our sins and indiscretions.

The devotion often focuses on the seven dolours or sorrows of Our Lady,
which are specific events in her life that are seen as particularly
poignant moments of suffering.  The sorrows include the particular
prophecy of Simeon, during the presentation of Jesus in the Temple,
where he predicted a sword will pierce Our Lady's heart. It is a kind of
keystone, representing the pain and suffering she endures, posing that
her sorrows are not separate from Christ\'s sacrifice but are intimately
connected to it. Even so, the theology also offers hope and consolation,
suggesting we find comfort and strength in challenging times, in empathy
with the suffering Our Lady also endured, without complaint. Her
stoicism in the face of suffering reflects the absolute purity of her
soul and her ineffable surrender to the will of God.

**Prayers to Our Lady of Sorrows**

-   Most holy Mother, Queen of Sorrows, who followed your beloved Son
    through all the Way of the Cross, and whose heart was pierced with a
    fresh sword of grief at all the stations of that most sorrowful
    journey, obtain for us, we beseech you, O most loving Mother, a
    perpetual remembrance of our Blessed Saviour's Cross and Death, and
    a true and tender devotion to all the mysteries of his most holy
    Passion. Obtain for us the grace to hate sin, even as he hated it in
    the agony in the garden; to endure wrong and insult with all
    patience as he endured them in the judgement hall; to be meek and
    humble in all our trials as he was before his judges; to love our
    enemies even as he loved his murderers, and prayed for them upon the
    Cross; and to glorify God and to do good to our neighbour, even as
    he did in every mystery of his suffering.O Queen of Martyrs, who by
    the Dolours of your Immaculate Heart on Calvary, merited to share
    the Passion of our Most Holy Redeemer, obtain for us some portion of
    your compassion, that for the love of Jesus crucified, we may be
    crucified to the world in this life, and in the life to come may, by
    his infinite merits and your powerful intercession, reign with him
    in glory everlasting.

*Amen*.

-   Blessed Virgin Mary, Our lady of Compassion, I turn to you with
    filial confidence. You shared fully in the work of our lord Jesus
    Christ, whose Death brought life to the world. Help me now to
    understand the truth about the divine compassion. Teach me to accept
    the sufferings that come into my life as you accepted obediently
    your own deep sorrows. Loving Mother of the Redeemer, you
    consecrated yourself by submitting to the divine plan. Obtain for me
    the grace to make my own submission to the same wise providence, now
    and at the hour of my death.

*Amen*.

-   Wrap me in your sacred mantle and help me pass through the valley of
    tears. Hail, Queen and Mother of mercy, our life, our sweetness, our
    hope, Hail! To you we cry, we exiled children of Eve. To you we
    sigh, groaning and weeping, in this valley of tears. Come then,
    Lady, our advocate, turn your merciful eyes upon us, and after this
    exile, show us Jesus, the blessed fruit of your womb. O most
    clement, O most compassionate, O sweet ever-Virgin Mary. Stay with
    us and give us your help, so that we may turn struggles into
    victories, and sorrows into joys. Pray for us, O Mother, for you are
    not only the Mother of sorrows, but also the Lady of all graces. Our
    Lady of Sorrows, strengthen me in the sufferings of life (*repeat 3
    times*)

\"O most holy Mother, Queen of Sorrows, who followed your beloved Son
through all the Way of the Cross\... obtain for us a perpetual
remembrance of our Blessed Saviour\'s Cross and Death, and a true and
tender devotion to all the mysteries of his most holy Passion.\" 

-   **Prayer for a Particular Grace:**

\"O mother most holy and sorrowful, Queen of Martyrs, you who stood by
your Son as He agonized on the cross. By the sufferings of your life, by
that sword of pain that pierced your heart, by your perfect joy in
heaven, look down on me kindly as I kneel before you, sympathizing with
your sorrows and offering you my petition with childlike trust.\" 

**Consecration to Our Sorrowful Mother**

Holy Mary, Mother of God and Queen of Martyrs, I do this day choose you
as my model, protectress, and advocate. Receive me as your special
servant, as a partaker in your sufferings. Give me strength always to
remain close to Jesus your Son who died on the cross for me. Accept
every good work that I may perform and offer it to your Son for me. Dear
Mother, stand by me in all my actions, that they may be directed to the
glory of God. Amen.
