\[RIGHT SIDEBAR\] The Acts of the Apostles recounts how they were
infused with the Holy Spirit fifty days after Easter, an event
celebrated by the feast of Pentecost. In this plaque, the use of gilding
and of enamel over metal foil creates a shimmery effect appropriate to
this mystical scene. Along with others of the same dimensions---
including three in the main building of the Metropolitan Museum---it
once decorated an imposing church furnishing, such as an altar,
candlestick, or large cross.

\[PHOTO CAPTION\] *Plaque with the Pentecost, a 12^TH^ century Dutch
presentation of the gifts of the Holy Spirit descending on the Apostles.
The photo is reproduced with the permission of the New York Metropolitan
Museum of Art (the Met), under its Open Access programme 2025.*

*\[PHOTO\]*

*INTRODUCTION* This Novena is designed to be recited from the Friday
before the Feast of the Ascension to the Vigil Feast of Pentecost
Sunday, whether the Feast of the Ascension is transferred to the Sunday,
or not. However, as with all novenas, they are free to recite any time
by the faithful.

\[TITLE\] Novena to the Holy Spirit

Our Novena has been amalgamated from two Novenas. The first is the
Imprimatur of a Novena granted by Patrick O'Boyle, Archbishop of
Washington, to the capital's Cathedral, in March 1948, with excerpts
reproduced from *My Catholic Life*. The second is the special novena
drafted by the Westminster Diocese Vocations Team to help us grow in
personal holiness, drafted in 2020, especially for pilgrims to the
Shrine of Our Lady of Walsingham. There are many similarities between
the two; for example, the Consecration to the Holy Spirit, and the
dedication of each day of the Novena to a special gift of the Holy
Spirit. The language has been updated to modern usage.

Novenas in honour of the Holy Ghost are among the oldest of all novenas
used by Catholics. Addressed to the beloved Third Person of the Blessed
Trinity, it is a powerful plea for the light, piety, strength, and love
needed by all of us. Traditionally, they are substantial bodies of
prayer, reflecting the spiritual depth of the gifts of the Holy Spirit.

St John Vianney once preached: "When we have the Holy Spirit, the heart
expands and bathes itself in divine love. And so, we should say every
morning, 'O God, send me Thy Spirit to teach me what I am and what Thou
art.

The Novena begins with an Act of Consecration.

**Act of Consecration to the Holy Spirit**

**(***To be said each day of the Novena)*

I bow before the great multitude of heavenly witnesses and offer myself,
body and soul to You, the Eternal Spirit of God. I adore the brightness
of Your purity, the unerring keenness of Your justice, and the might of
Your love. You are the strength and light of my soul. In You I live and
move. I desire never to grieve You by unfaithfulness to grace and I pray
with all my heart to be kept from the smallest sin against You.

Mercifully guard my every thought. Grant that I may always watch for
Your light, listen to Your voice, and follow Your gracious inspirations.
I give myself to You and ask You, by Your compassion to watch over me in
my weakness. Mindful of the suffering of Jesus, meditating on His Holy
Wounds, trusting in His Precious Blood, and adoring His stricken heart,
I implore You, Adorable Spirit, helper of my infirmity, to keep me in
Your grace that I may never sin against You.

Give me grace, O Holy Spirit, Spirit of the Father, and the Son to say
to You always and everywhere, \"Speak Lord for Your servant is
listening.\"

Mindful of your Church and its people, I ask you Father to pour out Your
Spirit upon us and grant us a new vision of Your glory, a new experience
of Your power, a new faithfulness to Your Word and a new consecration to
Your service so that Your love may grow among us.

Lord Jesus, let Your Spirit rest upon our parishes, schools and homes
that they may be places of love and truth where the weak are made strong
and the strong learn humility and all of us learn the wisdom that alone
comes from You.

Holy Spirit, Comforter and Sanctifier, temper our hearts that we may
accept Your love. Renew our minds that we may know Your truth.
Strengthen our will that we may follow You faithfully, through Christ
our Lord. Amen

**Prayer for the Seven Gifts of the Holy Spirit**

**(***To be said each day of the Novena)*

Lord Jesus Christ, before ascending into heaven You promised to send the
Holy Spirit to finish Your work in the souls of Your Apostles and
Disciples. Grant the same Holy Spirit to me that He may perfect in my
soul, the work of Your grace and Your love.

Grant me the Spirit of Wisdom that I may despise the perishable things
of this world and desire only the things that are eternal. Give me the
Spirit of Understanding to enlighten my mind with the light of Your
divine truth; the Spirit of Counsel that I may always choose the way of
pleasing You and gaining heaven; the Spirit of Fortitude that I may bear
my cross with You and overcome with courage all the obstacles that
oppose my salvation; the Spirit of Knowledge that I may know You and
myself and grow perfect on the path to holiness; the Spirit of Piety
that I may seek to serve You and Your Church; and the Spirit of Fear and
Awe that I may be filled with a loving reverence towards You, and dread
to displease You in any way. Mark me, dear Lord, with the sign of Your
true disciples and inspire me in all things with Your Spirit. Amen.

**Day One -- The Gifts of the Holy Spirit**\
*Holy Spirit! Lord of light!\
From Thy clear celestial height,\
Thy pure beaming radiance give!*

*Come Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful and kindle in them
the fire of your love. Send forth your Spirit, and they will be created.
And you will renew the face of the earth.*

**MEDITATION:** Our mighty and eternal God, who baptised us by water and
the Holy Ghost, has given us the means to achieve the forgiveness of all
our sins and to aspire to live in His ways of mercy and love. It is from
love and his unbounded mercy that he sent down from heaven His sevenfold
Spirit: the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel
and Fortitude, the Spirit of Knowledge and Piety, and fill us with the
Spirit of Holy Fear, so that we can know Him, love and serve Him in this
world and be happy with Him in the next.

**Prayer:** *  Holy Spirit, perfect my soul, to understand Jesus' grace
and love. Grant me the Spirit of Wisdom that I may despise the
perishable things of this world and aspire only after the things that
are eternal. Grant me the Spirit of Understanding to enlighten my mind
and the Spirit of Counsel that I may ever choose the surest way of
pleasing God. Give me the Spirit of Fortitude that I may overcome with
courage all the obstacles that oppose my salvation. Give me the Spirit
of Knowledge that I may know God and know myself and grow perfect in the
science of the Saints. Grant me the Spirit of Piety that I may find the
service of God sweet and amiable and the Spirit of Fear, that I may be
filled with a loving reverence towards God and may dread to displease
Him in any way. Mark me, dear Lord, with the sign of Your true disciples
and animate me in all things with Your Spirit. Amen.*

*Please recite one Our Father; one Hail Mary; and seven times the Glory
be*

**Day Two - The Gift of the Fear of God**

*Holy Spirit, come Thou, Father of the poor!\
Come, treasure which endures!\
Come Thou, Light of all that live.*

*Come Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful and kindle in them
the fire of your love. Send forth your Spirit, and they will be created.
And you will renew the face of the earth.*

**MEDITATION:** This gift brings us to our knees in reverence and awe
before the glory and greatness of God, like Moses before the burning
bush. In the heat of His love, we are confronted with all that is
unworthy within us---those attitudes and patterns of behaviour which
threaten to separate us from Him. In His greatness, we see our
smallness.

And yet, we are not crushed nor led into despair. For the Fear of the
Lord gives us not only the desire not to offend God, but also the hope
that God will give us the grace that we need in order to truly live
lives pleasing to Him.

**Prayer**: *Come, O blessed Spirit of Holy Fear, penetrate my innermost
heart, that I may set Thee, my Lord and God, before my face forever;
help me to shun all things that can offend Thee, and make me worthy to
appear before the pure eyes of Thy Divine Majesty in heaven, where Thou
live and reign in the unity of the Blessed Trinity, God, world without
end. Amen.*

*Please recite one Our Father; one Hail Mary; and seven times the Glory
be*

**Day Three - The Gift of Piety**

*Holy Spirit, thou, of all consolers, best,\
Visiting the troubled breast,\
Dost refreshing peace bestow.*

*Come Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful and kindle in them
the fire of your love. Send forth your Spirit, and they will be created.
And you will renew the face of the earth.*

**MEDITATION:** The gift of Piety creates in our hearts a filial
affection for God as our most loving Father. It inspires us to love and
respect for His sake, persons and things consecrated to Him, as well as
those who are vested with His authority. This includes His Blessed
Mother and the Saints, our beloved Church, the Pope, and clergy, as well
as our parents and families.

The penitent who is filled with the gift of Piety finds the practice of
religion not a burdensome duty but a delightful service. Where there is
love, there is no labour.

**Prayer**: *Come, O Blessed Spirit of Piety, possess my heart.
Encourage in me such a love for God that I may find satisfaction only in
His service and, for His sake, and lovingly submit to His Will. Amen.*

*Please recite one Our Father; one Hail Mary; and seven times the Glory
be*

**Day Four: The Gift of Fortitude**\
*Holy Spirit, thou in toil art comfort sweet;\
Pleasant coolness in the heat;\
Solace in the midst of woe.*

*Come Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful and kindle in them
the fire of your love. Send forth your Spirit, and they will be created.
And you will renew the face of the earth.*

**MEDITATION:** By the gift of Fortitude, the soul is strengthened
against natural fear and supported to the end in the performance of
duty. Fortitude imparts to the will an impulse and energy which move it
to undertake, without hesitancy, the most arduous tasks; to face
dangers, and to endure without complaint the slow martyrdom of even
lifelong tribulation. Fortitude understands that "He that perseveres to
the end shall be saved".

**Prayer**: *Come, O Blessed Spirit of Fortitude, uphold my soul in time
of trouble and adversity. Sustain my efforts to achieve holiness,
strengthen my weakness, and give me courage to resist all the assaults
of my enemies, that I may never be overcome by them, or by evil, and be
separated from Thee, my God, the greatest good. Amen.*

*Please recite one Our Father; one Hail Mary; and seven times the Glory
be*

**Day Five The Gift of Knowledge**

*Holy Spirit, Light immortal! Light Divine!\
Visit Thou these hearts of Thine,\
And our inmost being fill!*

*Come Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful and kindle in them
the fire of your love. Send forth your Spirit, and they will be created.
And you will renew the face of the earth.*

**MEDITATION:** The gift of Knowledge enables the soul to evaluate
created things at their true worth, in their relation to God. Knowledge
unmasks the pretence of creatures, reveals their emptiness, and points
out their only true purpose as instruments in the service of God. It
shows us the loving care of God even in adversity.

Knowledge directs us to glorify Him in every circumstance of life.
Guided by its light, we put first things first and prize the friendship
of God beyond all else. Knowledge is a fountain of life to those that
possess it.

**Prayer** *Come, O Blessed Spirit of Knowledge, and grant that I may
perceive the will of the Father; show me the nothingness of earthly
things, that I may realise their vanity and use them only for Thy glory
and my own salvation, looking ever beyond them to Thee and Thy eternal
rewards. Amen.*

*Please recite one Our Father; one Hail Mary; and seven times the Glory
be*

**Day Six: The Gift of Understanding**

*Holy Spirit, if Thou take Thy grace away,\
Nothing pure in man will stay,\
All his good is turned to ill.*

*Come Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful and kindle in them
the fire of your love. Send forth your Spirit, and they will be created.
And you will renew the face of the earth.*

**MEDITATION:** Understanding, as a gift of the Holy Ghost, helps us to
grasp the meaning of the truths of our beloved faith. It enables us to
penetrate the inner meaning of revealed truths, and through them to be
quickened to newness of life. Our faith ceases to be sterile and
inactive. Instead, it inspires a way of life that bears eloquent
testimony to the faith within us. We begin to walk worthy of God, act in
ways that are pleasing to Him, and come to understand the immense depths
of his love, mercy, and glory.

**Prayer**: *Come, O Spirit of Understanding, and enlighten our minds,
that we may know and believe all the mysteries of salvation; and may
merit at last to see the eternal light in Thy Light; and in the light of
glory, to have a clear vision of Thee and the Father and the Son. Amen.*

*Please recite one Our Father; one Hail Mary; and seven times the Glory
be*

**Day Seven: The Gift of Counsel**

*Holy Spirit, heal our wounds \~ our strength renew;\
On our dryness pour Thy dew!\
Wash the stains of guilt away!*

*Come Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful and kindle in them
the fire of your love. Send forth your Spirit, and they will be created.
And you will renew the face of the earth.*

**MEDITATION:** The gift of Counsel endows the soul with prudence,
enabling it to judge promptly and rightly what must be done, especially
in difficult circumstances. Counsel applies the principles furnished by
Knowledge and Understanding to the innumerable challenges that confront
us in the course of our daily duty as parents, teachers, public
servants, and as Catholics.

Counsel is common sense. Given by the Holy Spirit, it is a priceless
treasure in the quest of salvation. This is why we pray to the Most
High, that He may direct us in the Way, the Truth, and the Life.

**Prayer**: *Come, O Spirit of Counsel, help and guide me in all my
ways, that I may always do Thy holy will. Incline my heart to that which
is good; turn it away from all that is evil, and direct me by the
straight path of Thy commandments to that goal of eternal life for which
I long. Amen.*

*Please recite one Our Father; one Hail Mary; and seven times the Glory
be*

**Day Eight: The Gift of Wisdom**\
*Holy Spirit, bend the stubborn heart and will;\
Melt the frozen, warm the chill;\
Guide the steps that go astray!*

*Come Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful and kindle in them
the fire of your love. Send forth your Spirit, and they will be created.
And you will renew the face of the earth.*

**MEDITATION:** Embodying all the other gifts, Wisdom is the most
perfect of the gifts. Of Wisdom it is written, "all good things come to
me with her, and innumerable riches, through her hands". It is the gift
of Wisdom that strengthens our faith, fortifies hope, perfects charity,
and promotes the practice of virtue in the highest degree. Wisdom
enlightens the mind to discern and relish things divine. It distances us
from those activities that take us away from Jesus. It also helps us
understand that the Cross of Christ yields a divine sweetness. As Jesus
said: "Accept thy cross and follow me, for my yoke is sweet and my
burden light."

The gift of wisdom is a journey into the heart of God. As the well-known
prayer says: "Come, O Spirit of Wisdom! Bend our proud hearts and
stubborn wills. Empty us of all folly and façade, and reveal to us the
mysteries of Your ways so that we may follow You in humility and trust".

**Prayer**: *Come, O Spirit of Wisdom, and reveal to my soul the
mysteries of heavenly things, their exceeding greatness, power, and
beauty. Teach me to love them above and beyond all the passing joys and
satisfactions of earth. Help me to attain them and possess them forever.
Amen.*

*Please recite one Our Father; one Hail Mary; and seven times the Glory
be*

**Day Nine: The Fruits of the Holy Spirit**\
*Holy Spirit, thou, on those who evermore\
Thee confess, and Thee adore,\
In Thy sevenfold gifts, descend:*

*Come Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful and kindle in them
the fire of your love. Send forth your Spirit, and they will be created.
And you will renew the face of the earth.*

**MEDITATION:** The gifts of the Holy Spirit perfect our virtues by
enabling us to practice them with greater docility to divine
inspiration. As we grow in the knowledge and love of God, our service
becomes more sincere and generous and the practice of virtue, more
perfect. Such acts of virtue leave the heart filled with joy and
consolation and are known as Fruits of the Holy Spirit.

The gifts we have prayed for will bear rich fruit in our lives, not for
our own glory but for the glory of God. For which of these fruits do I
most hunger? In imitation of the Blessed Virgin, we are invited to give
birth to new life through the Holy Spirit working within us. May each
one of us, by responding generously to God's calling, bring forth fruit
in the Church as a living branch of the true vine which is Jesus Christ.

**Prayer**: *Come, O Divine Spirit, fill my heart with Thy heavenly
fruits: charity, joy, peace, patience, long-suffering, kindness,
goodness, faith, mildness, modesty, self-control and chastity, that I
may never weary in the service of God, but by continued faithful
submission to Thy inspiration, may merit to be united eternally with
Thee in the love of the Father and the Son. Amen.*

*Please recite one Our Father; one Hail Mary; and seven times the Glory
be*

**Additional prayers to the Holy Spirit**

***Veni Creator Spiritus***

*Come Holy Spirit, Creator come, from thy bright heavenly throne. Come
take possession of my soul and make it all thine own. Thou who are
called the Paraclete, best gift of God above, the living spring, the
living fire, sweet unction, and true love. Thou who are sevenfold in thy
grace, finger of God's right hand. Your promise, teaching little ones,
to speak and understand. O guide my mind with thy blest light, with love
my heart inflame. And with thy strength which ne'er decays, confirm my
mortal frame. Far from me drive the deadly foe. True peace unto me
bring. And through all perils lead me safe, beneath thy sacred Wing.*

*Through Thee may I the Father know. Through Thee the Blessed Son. And
thee the Spirit of them both, thrice blessed, three in one. All glory to
the Father be, and his co-equal Son. My love for Thee, Great Paraclete,
will last through ages run.*

***A prayer for Help from the Holy Spirit***

*Heavenly Father, hear my prayer. Send me the Paraclete, the Comforter.
May He cleanse my heart and my soul, protect me from peril and
temptation, enlighten my mind, and create in me a loving and pure heart,
in thrall to Thee, so that my life will bear witness to your eternal
power and glory. I ask this through Christ,*
